---
layout: post
title: "Lomuto's partitioning method"
date: 2020-04-24
---
<h3>Homework 10: Beating Merge Sort</h3>

After encountering issues with Test #5 when I followed the quicksort algorithm from the textbook, I did some research as to why repeats were such an issue. I still don't fully fully understand the math details that differentiate each partitioning method, but I learned I needed to use Hoare's method to pass all the tests in main. The textbook uses what is known as Lomuto's partitioning method. It compares the elements in the array to the first element - pivot. The worst-case scenario for quicksort using Lomuto's method is O(n*n). This is what I can only assume was happening to my program when it reached Test #5. The url's below and help from TA's helped me solve the issue. \

First, I followed the quicksort implementation in the textbook, but Test #5 did not pass. Test #5 consists of an array with lots of repetition. The method I provided here does not account for repeats. Even when I tried A[curr] <= pivot, Test #5 did not run and I am still not sure why. \

Helper function swaps two elements in the array after receiving two indexes. \
1. A pivot, middle (mid), and smallIndex are created. 
2. Swap the first element with the element in the middle.
3. Make the first element (previously mid) the pivot.
4. Initializes smallIndex to the first element of A

In a for-loop that traverses through the array from the second element to the last element in a sublist, compare the current element with pivot. If current is less than pivot, increment smallIndex (go to the next element in the array), and swap current with smallIndex. \
Finally, swap the first element in the array with smallIndex. Recall that smallIndex should now be at the end of the first sublist. \

Return its value. The next element in the array is the first element of the second sublist. \
Creates and initializes a pivot, low, and high. Pivot is the first element in a sublist of A. Low is the element before the sublist. And high is the last element in the sublist. \

In the while-loop: \\
1. Increment the lower index value by one if the element at low is less than pivot.
2. Decrease the higher index value by one if the element at the top of the sublist is larger than pivot.
3. If the lower index is greater than index 'high' or equal to it, the program has reached the cross over point. Return the index at the upper end of the sublist.
4. Swap the lower and higher indexes.

~~~~~~~~~~
// Lomuto's Partitioning Algorithm
int l_partition(int* A, int min, int max)
{

	int pivot, smallIndex, mid = (min + max) / 2;
	swap(A, min, mid);
	pivot = A[min];
	smallIndex = min;	

	for (int curr = min + 1; curr <= max; ++curr) {
		if (A[curr] < pivot) {
			smallIndex++;
			swap(A, smallIndex, curr);
		}
	}
	swap(A, min, smallIndex);

	return smallIndex;
}

In recQuickSort 
{
	loc = l_partition(A, min, max);
	recQuickSort(A, min, loc - 1);	
	recQuickSort(A, loc + 1, max);
}
~~~~~~~~~~
{: .language-c++}

For Hoare's partitioning method to beat the merge sort function in the main tests, use random pivoting. 
* Initializes a random integer between the first and last value passed to the function.
* Swaps this index with the first index of the array.
* Calls for the partitioning of the array using a random pivot and the last element in the list.
* Partitions the list into an upper half and a lower half depending on a random index (pivot).
* Recursively sorts the lower sublist
* Recursively sorts the upper sublist
* Sets a seed to generate a random number
* Calls the recursive function, passing a pointer to the array, and the first and last element.

Sources: Course textbook, online sources, and TA Center on Discord \
C++ Programming Program Design Including Data Structures(8th Ed.) by D.S. Malik 
[Quicksort](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/quick-sort/)
[Quicksort is better than mergesort](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/quicksort-better-mergesort/?ref=rp)
[Quicksort using random pivoting](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/quicksort-using-random-pivoting/)
[Hoare vs Lomuto partition scheme for quicksort](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/hoares-vs-lomuto-partition-scheme-quicksort/)
[Stackexchange on quicksort partitioning Hoere vs Lomuto](https://cs.stackexchange.com/questions/11458/quicksort-partitioning-hoare-vs-lomuto)